Add postprocessing documentation for TACS solutions (#389)
smdogroup/tacs: docs/source/postprocessing.rst

- **Hierarchical structure**: Organized data storage with metadata

Creating F5 Files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create an f5 file from a TACS analysis, use the ``TACSToFH5`` class. This should be done after solving your analysis but before cleaning up the assembler object.

.. code-block:: cpp

   #include "TACSToFH5.h"
   
   // After solving your analysis (e.g., assembler->solve())
   // Create an TACSToFH5 object for writing output to files
   ElementType etype = TACS_BEAM_OR_SHELL_ELEMENT;
   int write_flag = (TACS_OUTPUT_CONNECTIVITY | TACS_OUTPUT_NODES |
                     TACS_OUTPUT_DISPLACEMENTS | TACS_OUTPUT_STRAINS |
                     TACS_OUTPUT_STRESSES | TACS_OUTPUT_EXTRAS);
   TACSToFH5 *f5 = new TACSToFH5(assembler, etype, write_flag);
   f5->incref();
   f5->writeToFile("solution.f5");
   f5->decref();

.. tip::
   The ``ElementType`` should match the type of elements in your model. Common types include:
   - ``TACS_BEAM_OR_SHELL_ELEMENT`` for shell and beam elements
   - ``TACS_SOLID_ELEMENT`` for 3D solid elements
   - ``TACS_PLANE_STRESS_ELEMENT`` for 2D plane stress elements

Output Flags
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The following output flags control what data is written to the f5 file. You can combine multiple flags using the bitwise OR operator (``|``):

Author: I agree we should add a section on how to do the equivalent through pyTACS, but I think its still relevant to keep the C++ approach

     - Additional quantities (failure indices, design variables) - useful for optimization
   * - ``TACS_OUTPUT_LOADS``
     - Applied loads - helpful for load verification and visualization
   * - ``TACS_OUTPUT_COORDINATE_FRAME``
     - Element coordinate frames - useful for composite material analysis

.. note::
   For basic visualization, you typically need at least ``TACS_OUTPUT_CONNECTIVITY``, ``TACS_OUTPUT_NODES``, and ``TACS_OUTPUT_DISPLACEMENTS``. Add other flags based on your analysis requirements.

Converting F5 Files
-------------------

TACS provides two utilities for converting f5 files to standard visualization formats. These utilities are typically located in the ``extern/`` directory of your TACS installation.

f5totec: Convert to Tecplot Format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``f5totec`` utility converts f5 files to Tecplot format (.plt files):

.. code-block:: bash

   # Basic conversion
   f5totec solution.f5
   
   # Convert with strands (for time-dependent data)
   f5totec --use_strands solution.f5
   
   # Specify output filename
   f5totec solution.f5 -o wing_analysis.plt

This creates a ``solution.plt`` file that can be opened in Tecplot.

.. tip::

>    The ``--use_strands`` option is particularly useful for transient analyses or optimization histories where you want to animate the results over time.

Author: Yeah, I just took a look at the source for this and it doesn't really make sense. I'll remove this from the docs, but we should probably figure out how to fix this or remove it from f5totec

f5tovtk: Convert to VTK Format
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``f5tovtk`` utility converts f5 files to VTK format (.vtk files) for use with ParaView:

.. code-block:: bash

   # Basic conversion
   f5tovtk solution.f5
   
   # Specify output filename
   f5tovtk solution.f5 -o wing_analysis.vtk

This creates a ``solution.vtk`` file that can be opened in ParaView.

.. note::
   Both utilities automatically handle the conversion of element-wise data to nodal data through averaging, making the results suitable for smooth visualization.

**Troubleshooting Conversion Issues:**
- Ensure the f5 file was generated successfully and contains the expected data
- Check that the conversion utilities are compiled and accessible in your PATH

> - For large files, conversion may take several minutes - this is normal

Author: So the only case that I could think of for this would be the topology optimization cases @gjkennedy and his students were working with a while back. I think in those cases the models could be in the 100's of millions of elements. I'm not sure how long f5totec would take convert files of that size. But I agree, for most users this probably won't be relevant

.. list-table:: Beam/Shell Element Output Variables
   :widths: 20 20 60
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Category
     - Variable
     - Description
   * - Displacements
     - u, v, w
     - Translational displacements
   * - 
     - rotx, roty, rotz
     - Rotational displacements
   * - Strains
     - ex0, ey0, exy0
     - Membrane strains
   * - 
     - ex1, ey1, exy1
     - Bending strains
   * - 
     - eyz0, exz0
     - Transverse shear strains
   * - 
     - erot
     - Rotational strain
   * - Stresses
     - sx0, sy0, sxy0
     - Membrane stress resultants
   * - 
     - sx1, sy1, sxy1
     - Bending stress resultants
   * - 
     - syz0, sxz0
     - Transverse shear stress resultants
   * - 
     - srot
     - Rotational stress
   * - Extras
     - failure0-failure6
     - Failure indices for different failure criteria
   * - 
     - dv1-dv7
     - Design variables
   * - Loads
     - fx, fy, fz
     - Applied forces
   * - 
     - mx, my, mz
     - Applied moments
   * - Coordinate Frame
     - t0x, t0y, t0z
     - First tangent vector components
   * - 
     - t1x, t1y, t1z
     - Second tangent vector components
   * - 
     - t2x, t2y, t2z

>      - Normal vector components

Reviewer: I would call these 1,2,and 3 directions rather than tangent and normal

     - Variable
     - Description
   * - Displacements
     - u
     - Scalar displacement
   * - Strains
     - ux, uy (2D) / ux, uy, uz (3D)
     - Gradient components
   * - Stresses
     - sx, sy (2D) / sx, sy, sz (3D)
     - Flux components
   * - Extras
     - failure
     - Failure index
   * - 
     - dv1, dv2, dv3
     - Design variables
   * - Loads
     - f
     - Applied load

PCM Elements (TACS_PCM_ELEMENT)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. list-table:: PCM Element Output Variables
   :widths: 20 20 60
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Category
     - Variable
     - Description
   * - Displacements
     - dT
     - Temperature change
   * - Strains
     - gradx, grady
     - Temperature gradient components
   * - Stresses
     - fluxx, fluxy
     - Heat flux components
   * - Extras
     - rho
     - Density
   * - 
     - dv1, dv2, dv3
     - Design variables
   * - 
     - phase
     - Phase field
   * - Loads
     - Q
     - Applied heat source

Visualization Tips
------------------

1. **Element-wise vs. Nodal Data**: F5 files contain both element-wise and nodal data. The conversion utilities automatically perform nodal averaging for element-wise quantities.

> 2. **Higher-order Elements**: Higher-order elements are automatically converted to basic element types for visualization (e.g., quadratic triangles become linear triangles).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Higher-order Elements**: Higher-order elements are split into multiple lower order element for visualization (e.g., each quadratic triangle becomes 3 linear triangles).
```

5. **Large Models**: For very large models, consider using only the essential output flags to reduce file size and processing time.

Visualizing Deformed Surfaces
-----------------------------

One of the most common postprocessing tasks is visualizing the deformed shape of structures. TACS provides both nodal coordinates (X, Y, Z) and displacements (u, v, w) that can be used to create deformed surface visualizations.

Creating Deformed Geometry in Tecplot
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In Tecplot, you can visualize deformed surfaces by creating new variables that represent the deformed coordinates:

1. **Open the converted .plt file** in Tecplot
2. **Create new variables** for deformed coordinates:
   - Go to ``Data > Alter > Specify Equations``
   - Create new variables:
     - ``{XDEF} = {X} + {u}`` (deformed X coordinate)
     - ``{YDEF} = {Y} + {v}`` (deformed Y coordinate)  
     - ``{ZDEF} = {Z} + {w}`` (deformed Z coordinate)
3. **Create the deformed plot**:
   - Go to ``Plot > 3D``
   - Set ``X``, ``Y``, ``Z`` to ``XDEF``, ``YDEF``, ``ZDEF``

>    - Choose appropriate surface rendering (``Surface``, ``Mesh``, or ``Contour``)

Reviewer: This is irrelevant to plotting the deformed surface

Author: I assume you mean the 3rd bullet? Could you clarify @A-CGray

Author: Nevermind, gotcha. I'll update this to match Tecplots actual UI

4. **Add displacement magnitude** for color coding:
   - Create variable: ``{DISP_MAG} = sqrt({u}*{u} + {v}*{v} + {w}*{w})``
   - Set ``Contour`` to ``DISP_MAG`` to color-code by displacement magnitude

**Example Tecplot equations:**
::

   {XDEF} = {X} + {u}
   {YDEF} = {Y} + {v}
   {ZDEF} = {Z} + {w}

>    {DISP_MAG} = sqrt({u}*{u} + {v}*{v} + {w}*{w})

Reviewer: Why not just include this in the steps above?

- **ParaView**: Use the ``Scale Factor`` in Warp By Vector filter or multiply in Calculator expressions

**Animation for Time-Dependent Results:**
- **Tecplot**: Use the ``Animation`` panel to cycle through time steps
- **ParaView**: Use the ``Animation View`` to create smooth animations of the deformation

**Combined Visualization:**
- Show both undeformed (wireframe) and deformed (solid) geometry
- Use different colors for different displacement components
- Overlay stress/strain contours on the deformed geometry

Example Workflow
----------------

Here's a complete example of generating and visualizing TACS results with deformed geometry:

.. code-block:: cpp

   // 1. Create f5 file from TACS analysis
   ElementType etype = TACS_BEAM_OR_SHELL_ELEMENT;
   int write_flag = (TACS_OUTPUT_CONNECTIVITY | TACS_OUTPUT_NODES |
                     TACS_OUTPUT_DISPLACEMENTS | TACS_OUTPUT_STRAINS |
                     TACS_OUTPUT_STRESSES | TACS_OUTPUT_EXTRAS);
   TACSToFH5 *f5 = new TACSToFH5(assembler, etype, write_flag);
   f5->writeToFile("wing_analysis.f5");
   f5->decref();

> 

Reviewer: A python example would be more useful
